<header
    <title Onlineworkshop by GASB>
    <subtitle GASB (German Association for Synthetic Biology) Workshop: GASB meets PAW – Genetic Engineering Key Issues #3: Patents>
    <image https://static.igem.wiki/teams/5088/wiki/images/human-practices/legal-political/resize-legal-political-header-1.webp>
    <parent /human-practices/legal-political>
>


<image <url https://static.igem.wiki/teams/5088/wiki/images/human-practices/legal-political/gasb.webp> <width 30>>


<section Reason for Contact>
In order to get an overview of the legal basis and the situation in patent law, we participated in the GASB webinar "Genetic Engineering Key Issue #3: Patents". The guests Prof. Hans-Georg Dederer, Dr. Steffen Kawelke and Dr. Michael Kock gave an insight into the topic of patents in plant breeding. The focus was on green genetic engineering and new genomic techniques.


<section Aspects from Prof. Hans-Georg Dederer>
In general the Patent law for plants is governed by biopatent law, which is harmonized across the European Union. This includes patent protection for biotechnological inventions and also the field of plant breeding technology. This includes not only classical genetic engineering, but also the new genetic techniques. These new genetic techniques are characterized by the fact that they can generate mere mutations and that they can generate these mutations in a site-specific manner in the genome. It is important that these mutations also occur in nature or can be achieved through conventional breeding methods. There is patent protection for plants derived from new genomic techniques. The subject matter of a biopatent can be processes or products. In the case of NGT, these could be patents for a method of genome editing to produce resistance in a particular plant. In the case of a product patent, it could be a plant containing a specific genetic DNA sequence The scope of biopatents differs from the scope of normal patents. In the case of process patents, they protect not only the process (NGT), but also the products (plants) obtained. The offspring of the patented NGT plants that have this invention and in which the corresponding characteristic is expressed are also protected.
In order to obtain such a patent, certain requirements must be met: It must be an inventive step that is new and commercially applicable. This requires a certain level of innovation.


Excluded from biopatent law are plant varieties, inventions that are limited to one plant variety, and biological processes such as crossing or selection, as these are based on natural processes. To prevent an NGT patent from extending to plants that have acquired the same mutation or trait naturally through biological processes, the European Patent Office has introduced a disclaimer solution. The disclaimer solution means that the person applying for an NGT patent must limit their patent application with a disclaimer.

At the European level, the issue is the deregulation of NGT plants in the field of genetic engineering law. Genetic engineering law is a right of authorization use. Patent law, on the other hand, is a law that can prohibit the use of products. In the case of a genetic engineering invention, the use of this invention is governed by genetic engineering law. Legally, patent law and genetic engineering law must be kept separate. On a factual level, however, there may be a connection, as small and medium-sized breeders are to benefit from this deregulation. However, they may be prevented from using NGT to develop new varieties because NGT patents already exist from third parties. Breeders must first conduct a patent search to obtain an overview of patented inventions and then obtain licenses if necessary. In this context, access problems arise particularly for small and medium-sized companies, as the licenses are usually very expensive.


<subsubsection Plant variety protection>
In order to protect plant varieties, there is the Plant Variety Protection Act at national level and the Plant Variety Protection Regulation at European level. There are no significant differences between the two. Distinctness, homogeneity, stability, novelty and a registered variety denomination are prerequisites for protecting a variety. There is also an unlimited breeder's privilege: as soon as a plant variety has been placed on the market by a variety protection holder, any other breeder can use this variety to develop it into a new variety of their own. The new variety can be passed on without restriction and without the consent of the original variety protector. Within patent protection, the breeder's privilege is limited to the development of a variety. If a developed variety contains the patented invention and is placed on the market, the respective breeder requires the license of the patent holder.


How far do ethics extend into patent protection? There is an ethical context in the area of patents on life. Patent law contains ethical clauses with restraint. Microorganisms, plants and animals are to be treated legally as objects. However, humans cannot be the object of law and instrumentalized for commercial interests. The entire human body in all phases of its development is therefore not patentable. For non-human living beings there are limited exclusions from patenting.


<subsection Aspects from Steffen Kawelke>
The Federal Association of German Plant Breeders has published an official position on the current patent situation in 2023. The plant breeding industry in Germany is very diverse. This diversity extends to large, small and medium-sized breeding companies for vegetables, sugar beet, fodder plants, potatoes, cereals, maize and even ornamental plants. The primary and preferred property right in Germany and Europe is the right of plant variety protection. It guarantees unrestricted and free access to the latest plant material and ensures continuous breeding progress. The requirements for a variety are distinctiveness, uniformity, stability, novelty and a registrable variety name. Compared to plant variety protection, patent law is a prohibitive right and can have a restrictive effect on free access to current breeding material. However, patent law currently has only limited practical significance in plant breeding, as essentially biological processes, products thereof and varieties are not patentable. Furthermore, there are regulatory hurdles for classical genetically modified organisms and genome editing and a low practical significance of traits from undirected mutagenesis. Crossing products can be patented and are no longer available to the open source system.


Kawelke also explained a possible future situation:

If genome editing becomes practical in the EU, patents could increase and become more important. A large proportion of new plant characteristics would be patented if the molecular basis is known and the characteristic can be achieved using technological means. As a result, a growing number of varieties could be affected by patents. As a result, variety protection could be undermined because patent protection overrides the breeder exemption (regulated in variety protection). Dr. Kawelke also drew attention to the demands of the Federal Association of German Breeders (Bundesverband Deutscher Pflanzenzüchter). If genome editing is used in the EU, patents could become more important given the current legal situation. A large proportion of new plant traits would be patented if the molecular basis is known and the trait can be achieved by technical means. As a result, a growing number of varieties could be affected by patents. This could undermine plant variety protection, as patent protection overrides the breeder's exemption (regulated in plant variety protection). It will also become more difficult to outcross patented traits, as not only one trait is included in NGT varieties. The increasing number of patents in a variety makes the use of this variety increasingly unrealistic for the breeder under plant variety protection.


<section Inclusion in Our Project>
After receiving feedback highlighting the importance of considering the political and legal situation in Europe, we sought guidance from experts in the field of New Genomic Techniques (NGTs). The GASB workshop provided us with initial information on the legal framework, particularly with regard to the forthcoming EU regulations on plants produced using NGTs. By participating, we were also able to get to know other potential interview partners. As a result of the workshop, we were able to speak with <link <path /human-practices/legal-political/dederer> <content Prof. Hans-Georg Dederer>> and <link <path /human-practices/implementation/gaebert> <content Jana Gäbert>>.